# Copyright

**Supplemental material**: Introductions to creeds and confessions copyright © 2019 by Crossway. Creeds and confessions were selected and introductions were prepared by Rev. Dr. Chad Van Dixhoorn. Special thanks to the Trinity Psalter Hymnal Joint Venture Board for granting Crossway permission to use the creeds and confessional material found in the *Trinity Psalter Hymnal*. Chalcedonian Definition © Norman P. Tanner, ed., 2005, *Decrees of the Ecumenical Councils*, vol. 1, Burns & Oates, an imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc. Augsburg Confession adapted from *Concordia: The Lutheran Confessions–A Reader’s Edition of the Book of Concord*, 2nd ed. © 2005, 2006 Concordia Publishing House. Used with permission. All rights reserved. Belgic Confession, Heidelberg Catechism, and Canons of Dort adapted from Doctrinal Standards as found in *Psalter Hymnal* © 1987, 1988 Faith Alive Christian Resources / Christian Reformed Church in North America (Doctrinal Standards translations © 1985, 1986, 1988). Used by permission. All rights reserved. London Baptist Confession adapted from James M. Renihan, *Faith and Life for Baptists: The Documents of the London Particular Baptist Assemblies, 1689–1695* (RBAP, 2016). The ESV Preface, Explanation of Features, introductions to each book of the Bible, headings in the Bible text, Cross-Reference System (as adapted), and Concordance copyright © 2001 by Crossway. Color Illustrations and Maps copyright © 2008 by Crossway. The ESV Cross-Reference System is adapted from the original English Revised Version cross-reference system.
